We consider a ride-share setting in which a ride-share
provider for a particular metropolitan area receives
a sequence S of trip announcements over time from
potential participants. Each announced trip specifies
whether the participant wants to act as a driver or a
rider. This process generates two disjoint sets of trip
announcements: a set of rider trips R ⊂ S and a set of
driver trips D ⊂ S. Each trip announcement specifies an
origin and a destination location and additional information that reflects its potential timing. Suppose for
simplicity that each origin and destination location is a
member of a set P of locations and that the travel time
tij and travel distance dij between each pair of locations
i, j ∈ P are known and constant. Let v(s) and w(s) represent, respectively, the origin and destination of trip
announcement s ∈ S.
To minimize inconvenience for participants, we focus primarily on systems in which at most one pickup
and delivery can take place during the trip and in
which riders do not transfer from one driver’s vehicle
to another. For completeness, an extension of our basic
system to the case in which drivers may be matched
to multiple riders is provided in Section 4.4. We suppose that the ride-share service provider automatically
generates match proposals between riders and drivers.
An important consideration for a centralized system
that creates matches between autonomous independent entities is whether the participants are satisfied
with the matches. If they are not satisfied, they may not
accept the proposed matches and eventually may stop
using the system. Besides the interpersonal aspects, the
timing of the ride and the financial benefits of sharing
this ride together are important for the satisfaction of
the participants with a particular ride-share match.
Drivers and riders provide information on their time
schedule preferences in their announcements by specifying their earliest departure time and, indirectly,
their latest arrival time using the notion of departure time flexibility. Specifically, we suppose that each
announcement s ∈ R ∪ D provides an earliest time e(s)
at which the participant can depart from the origin v(s)
and a time flexibility f (s) that specifies the difference
between e(s) and the latest time he would like to depart
by if he were driving alone. For example, if a driver
wished to arrive at his destination no later than l(s),
then we have time flexibility f (s)  l(s) − e(s) − tv(s), w(s)
.
The ride-sharing system provider automatically establishes ride-shares over time, matching drivers and
riders who have announced trips. In this paper, we
assume that a ride-share match is acceptable to its
two participants only if it satisfies both of their time
requirements; only acceptable matches are considered
feasible. This implies that the participant for announcement s departs his origin no earlier than e(s) and
arrives at his destination no later than l(s). A participant announces his trip at time a(s) shortly before or
at his earliest departure time. The announcement lead
time a
l
(s) ≥ 0 denotes the difference between the participant’s earliest departure time and his announcement
time.
To assess the benefits of a particular match for an
individual participant, we calculate the cost savings
compared with traveling alone. For simplicity, we focus
on a setting in which riders have a car available that
they could use to drive to their destination alone if
no ride-share can be identified. This means that for
each rider–driver match we can calculate the vehiclemile savings from ride sharing as compared with both
driving alone as follows: dv(d), w(d) + dv(r), w(r) − (dv(d), v(r) +
dv(r), w(r) + dw(r), w(d)
). Since variable trip costs, such as
fuel expense, are typically proportional to the travel
distance, the vehicle-mile savings also represent cost
savings. We assume that the usual objective of the system provider is to maximize the total system vehiclemile savings achieved by all driver–rider matches in
a matching solution, which is the sum of the savings
generated by each individual match.
If the cost of a ride-share trip is less than the sum
of the costs of individual trips of its participants, it
is always possible to allocate the cost savings among
the participants such that each individual receives cost
savings. This means that, as long as we have positive
savings, a ride-share matching is individually rational
since none of the participants prefers driving alone
(i.e., remaining unmatched) to their match. Often, there
may be time-feasible ride-share matches that do not
generate positive vehicle-mile savings. These matches
are not considered acceptable and are also treated as
infeasible during the matching optimization.
The variable costs of each ride-share trip should be
divided between the two participants in a way that is
budget-balanced orefficient. This means that the total cost
allocated to the participants is equal to the total cost
incurred in the ride-share. As such, a driver can never
receive a compensation that is greater than the cost
of the complete trip to accommodate the rider. This is
a relevant requirement in practice to distinguish ride
sharing from commercial taxi services in legal terms
(see Geron 2013 for a recent discussion on the legal
issues). In this paper, we assume that the vehicle-mile
savings (cost savings) of sharing a ride are equally
divided between the two matched participants. It is
not difficult to see that such an allocation satisfies the
properties of the Shapley value (1953), a well-known
cost-allocation method in cooperative game theory.
We assume that the preferences of participants for
different ride-share matches depend solely on the
potential financial benefits, that is, the cost savings as
compared with driving alone. The preference list of
each participant consists of the set of feasible matches
ranked based on the corresponding savings. For example, if a particular rider can be matched with drivers 1,
2, or 3 with respective savings of 3, 1, and 5, then the
preference list for this rider is (3, 1, 2). We denote the
preferences with the following notation: a ¬c b denotes
that person c prefers person a to b, and a  c b denotes
that either a ¬c b or person c is indifferent between a
and b. Note that these preference lists are only defined
over the set of feasible matches and are therefore
incomplete since some matches are not feasible.
In the ride-share setting, it may often occur that an
individual participant may have multiple ride-share
match options that yield the same savings. This may
occur, for example, when multiple riders announce
around the same time and travel from the same origin
to the same destination. We assume that participants
are indifferent between matches if they generate the
same financial benefits; thus, some preference lists may
contain ties. In this context, we define a stable matching as a matching in which no driver–rider pair who
are not matched together both strictly prefer each other  to their corresponding partners in the matching. More formally, let µ(s) denote the matched ride-share partner of participant s, where µ(s)  s implies that participant s is unmatched. Define a blocking pair as a pair  (d,r) ∈ D × R where µ(d) , r, r >d µ(d), and d >r µ(r);  note that d and/or r may be unmatched. This stability criterion is referred to as weak stability (see Irving 1994  for two other stability criteria in settings with preference indifference). We focus exclusively on weak stability in this paper and use the term stability to indicate  weak stability.
